[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEART BEATING]
>>SUE MORTER: Ayurveda is
one of the oldest healing
disciplines in the world.
It aims at bringing the body
back into balance with nature
by living in sync with
its circadian rhythms,
restoring digestive and,
particularly, lymphatic health.
This allows the body and
mind to access a deeper state
of self-awareness and healing.
With us today is
Dr. John Douillard.
He is a bestselling author,
a globally-recognized leader
in the fields of natural health,
Ayurveda, and sports medicine.
His website,
lifespa.com, is evolving
the way Ayurveda is
understood around the world,
with over 9 million
YouTube views.
Welcome, Dr. John.
It's so wonderful to have you.
>>JOHN DOUILLARD:
Great to be here.
>>SUE: I also have to say,
you're a friend of mine.
And it's so good to see you.
I haven't seen you in 15 years.
And I'm thrilled to be involved
in the conversation today.
>>DOUILLARD: Absolutely.
>>SUE: I look so forward.
So, OK, let's start
from the beginning.
You went to India
a long time ago.
And you went for
a three week trip.
And you stayed for
a year and a half.
What happened?
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
You know, the
quick, long story--
I was scheduled to ride
mountain bikes from Lhasa, Tibet
to Kathmandu.
And the Chinese government
gave this window
of where you could do that.
My brother-in-law,
who is Doug Henning--
the magician from
way back when--
had a dream, vision,
a lucid dream,
that there was an accident.
And I was paralyzed
from the waist down.
And I was playing
wheelchair basketball.
And he said, please don't
go I was like, really?
You can't do that to me.
My mother had a similar dream
and said, please don't go.
So I didn't go.
But I had all this time.
So I went to India to try
to study Ayurvedic medicine.
I went for a three
week vacation,
and ended up finding
a teacher there
who was willing to teach me.
And I stayed there
for a year and a half.
And when I came back,
somebody I didn't even know
was driving my car.
My stuff was in about
five different homes.
And I kind of put
it all together
and started my life again.
>>SUE: So you
literally just stayed?
>>DOUILLARD: I
literally just stayed.
>>SUE: Just like,
I'm not coming back.
>>DOUILLARD: I didn't come back.
I had a practice.
I called my partner and I
said, I'm not coming back.
And back then, it
took like an hour
to get a line to call America.
And he could barely hear me.
And all he really got
was, I'm not coming back.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: And that was it.
And I just said,
you know, it's just
kind of one of those things
where I just said, yes.
I'm doing this.
I had student loans
and a lot of reasons
why I shouldn't have
done that, but I just
knew that this was an
opportunity of a lifetime.
And what was really weird--
and I stayed there
for a year and a half,
studied Ayurvedic medicine,
met Deepak Chopra there,
came back and ran a
center for eight years,
taught medical doctors.
But I never-- when
I was in India
for that year and a half--
never, for one minute,
did I ever think
that I would actually
use Ayurvedic knowledge in
my life or in my practice.
It wasn't like, oh, great.
I'm going to get this knowledge
and come back and then do
Ayurvedic medicine.
I think I just think
too slow for that.
I was just, like, so
wrapped up in the experience
of the moment.
It was so juicy that I
just went like, I'm in.
And I don't know
where this is going.
But I didn't have a plan.
I think that was
the magic of it.
I was just so locked
into the present moment.
>>SUE: So I think
that that's really
how authentic paths unfold.
It's one step at a time.
We're drawn into it.
It's almost like the
universe conspires to put us
in our true expression
in the world.
And that is definitely what I
have watched happen with you.
So tell us a little
bit about what
it was like meeting Deepak.
Of course, we want to dive
into that a little bit.
People love to hear about how
wonderful people work together,
find each other, and
produce amazing things.
What can you share with us?
>>DOUILLARD: I met him in the
Oberoi Hotel in New Delhi.
And he was working in India
with Maharishi, the founder
of the TM Organization.
And that was the hub
that I had as well,
because my sister
was really into that.
And it's hard to go
into all the details,
but I ended up meeting my wife
from Santa Barbara in India.
And we went back, got
married real quick,
and came back to India.
And she was pregnant now,
fainting in the streets
of New Delhi.
And it became clear we
had to get out of India
and have this baby.
And Deepak said,
well, you know, I'm
having the opening of the
center in Massachusetts.
You can come back.
You can co-direct it
with me, because I had
all this Ayurvedic training.
And there wasn't a
lot of people who
had a lot of Ayurvedic training
in the west at that point.
And so I did.
I came back and ran his center.
And we actually shared the
same desk for eight years.
He'd come two times a week,
I'd come three times--
two, three times a week-- and
became really good friends.
And you know, I have nothing
but the highest respect
from his knowledge and wisdom.
I got to watch him grow
from being a medical doctor,
to being Deepak Chopra.
And it was an amazing
thing to watch.
I learned a lot from him
about so many things,
and how I wanted
to position myself
in my life and my career.
>>SUE: Right.
And at that time, then,
you went into more
of a private practice.
And you started expressing
your gifts and your desire
to serve humanity
through Ayurveda.
Can you share a little
bit about what Ayurveda
is for our viewers, and just
get everyone on the same page
there?
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
So Deepak-- when I
travelled with Deepak,
and we lectured for eight
years together as well.
And he was like
the wow of people.
And I was the guy that would
come in after and then give
them the nuts and bolts of
how to eat, how to sleep,
when to eat, what to eat--
all the details of how to
live a healthy, healthy life.
And that's been sort of
my world over the years,
is working more one-on-one
and diving really deep
into Ayurvedic health,
Ayurvedic psychology--
and really understanding
how to help guide people
on their journey to wellness.
>>SUE: Excellent.
And so tell us a little
bit about the foundation
of Ayurveda-- the structure,
what it is as an approach
to wellness--
>>DOUILLARD: There's two
definitions of Ayur--
Ayu means "life", Veda
means "knowledge".
And you can think of Ayurveda
as the science of life--
how to live in
sync and in harmony
with the cycles of nature,
how to go downstream
with the current versus swimming
against the grain, right?
We all feel that
against-the-grain feeling.
You're exhausted at
the end of the day
and, you know, recovering on
the weekend, stuff like that.
But then there's
the real definition
of Ayurveda, which is sort
of the Vedic definition--
Veda meaning "truth",
Ayu meaning "life".
It's about a science to
unfold the truth of your life.
How do you let who
you truly are out?
Because we all sort of know that
it's this crazy mind of ours
that impacts us in ways
that take us out mentally,
physically, emotionally.
Most of our health concerns
come from how we handle
or don't handle stress, right?
So understanding that
component is huge.
So how do we let
the truth of us out?
How do we let go of old
protective patterns of behavior
we created as young children,
that we're still protecting
on the screen today as adults?
How do we unravel all that?
How do we become conscious
and free ourselves
from these patterns
that are based
on needing to be loved and
approved of and appreciated
by everybody else?
And how do we get
ourselves to be that love?
It's a little risky.
How do you let the delicate
petals of your flower open,
and let something delicate
and vulnerable-- yet,
the most powerful part us--
out?
That's Ayurveda.
>>SUE: Right.
And so a lot of people
have it that Ayurveda
is kind of compartmentalized
into these doshas.
And working with the doshas
gets you a start in a doorway
into starting to
understand this.
Can you just speak a little bit?
I know that you have
your own understanding
about the perspective there.
>>DOUILLARD: I think that the
doshas are really important.
They are the aspects of
nature, the governing
principles of nature.
Winter is Vata.
It's cold and dry and
moving all the time.
And people with a lot of
Vata, they're cold and dry.
And they need more
blankets, you know?
And their nervous
system is going
really fast because
they have a lot of air
in their constitution.
It's a very real thing.
The summer quality, Pitta--
fire, heat, competitive, driven.
We know people like that
are throwing off the covers
all the time.
And then we have spring
qualities, earth and water,
heavy, easygoing, calm.
And there's people that like
that, that hold onto more
water, more congested, right?
So these are the
principles of nature.
Now in Ayurveda,
it's such a given
that when you look at someone,
you know instantly what
you're looking at.
Is it winter, summer, spring?
Vata, Pitta, Kapha?
So it's like taking
a car to a mechanic
and then they go, it's a Ford.
I mean, we know it's a Ford.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: And we
know it's a 1960 Ford,
or whatever it is, you know?
So that's such a
basic part of Ayurveda
and a platform from which
everything else comes.
So it's sort of
become, after a while,
it becomes such an
instinctive understanding,
you don't talk
about it that much.
But it makes really good
sidebars in magazines.
Like, what's my body type?
And what tea should I drink?
And what herbs or
aroma should I smell?
Stuff like that, which
is all valuable too.
It's just that, you
know, in India, they
do it a little differently
than it's done here.
>>SUE: And so it's a
way in for our culture.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah, absolutely.
>>SUE: It's a way in for
us to begin to learn.
And then I know that
you take it deeper
and you start speaking about
these circadian rhythms.
And you speak about digestion.
And you speak about
the lymphatic system.
And can you just speak
about how those interrelate,
and how it affects someone's
ability to heal or not heal?
>>DOUILLARD: Ayurveda 101
is circadian medicine,
which is now Nobel
Prize-winning science.
I saw a study years ago
that the bugs in the soil
changed from winter,
summer, to spring.
There was another
study that showed
that deer, when they
eat bark in the winter,
they have certain bugs, microbes
for helping them digest bark,
And in the summer,
they eat leaves.
And they have different bugs
for eating and digesting leaves.
And the studies show
that if the deer was
to eat bark in the summer
when they didn't have
the right bugs,
it could literally
cause such indigestion in the
deer, it could kill the deer.
I had written a book
called "The 3-Season Diet",
eating with the seasons, kind
of tying Ayurvedic medicine
to seasonal eating.
And I was like, whoa.
Deer die when they
eat out of season?
And now recently,
a Stanford study
came out and showed
that the Hausa
tribe, the hunter/gatherer's
bugs in their gut
literally do change from
winter, summer, and spring, that
are the seasonal foods
that are coming seasonally,
inoculate our gut bugs with the
right bugs for the right season
to give you immunity
in the winter,
decongestant in the spring,
dissipating heat in the summer.
It's the intelligence.
It's our connection
to those rhythms.
And we process sprayed foods
that have no sterile bugs.
We take herbs that are sterile,
like extracts of herbs.
And we're losing our connection
to the rhythms of nature.
And Ayurveda 101 is to
get that rhythm back.
So you start having
the right bugs feeding
the right physiology
for the right season,
at the right time.
So you wake up in the morning,
you go to sleep at night.
You're in sync with the rhythms.
That's step 1.
If you don't have
that in rhythm,
you're exhausted at
the end of the day.
You're exhausted
on the weekends.
You're constantly getting
sick, constantly getting
run-down, stuff like that.
>>SUE: And we're in a
culture that is completely
out of touch with that.
We are completely,
for the most part
as a culture, focused on
something entirely different,
a totally different
radio station.
If you were to give someone
a suggestion in this moment,
just to drop them
into start this,
do this right now, to
just start to shift.
And then we're going to
continue a conversation.
But they can start thinking in
terms of, OK, I could do that.
And maybe it could start to
make a big difference for them
throughout our
entire conversation,
to have a change in their
life, to connect again
with the greatest
power on Earth.
>>DOUILLARD: What would it be?
>>SUE: What would it be?
>>DOUILLARD: Nature.
>>SUE: Number 1,
getting in nature?
>>DOUILLARD: Number 1, you
have to get into nature.
Meditation is a bio-hack for
when we came into civilization
and we lost the
rhythms, the synchrony
of nature and ourself.
So we then-- someone figured
out, if we just close our eyes
and meditate, we can up-regulate
like 5,000 different genes
and get all the
benefits of thousands
of years of genetic expression
of being in sync with nature.
And we've lost that.
So that's step 1.
You've got to get out in nature.
>>SUE: So get your
mind out of the way.
Drop into who you
really are, even
if you don't know it
or see visual things,
or have some voice
speak to you and say,
this is the truth
of who you are.
There's a sensation
that comes over you
that is that connection
that you're speaking about.
>>DOUILLARD: The health benefits
forest bathing in Japan.
There's like 74 forests
that are certified
to give you therapeutic benefit
when you walk through them.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: I mean,
there's real hard science
behind the benefits of that.
And there's ancient
wisdom to back it up.
>>SUE: Awesome.
I love it.
So I know that you're very
focused and have written books.
And we mentioned the books
about the seasonal eating.
Speak to us about just a few
details about circadian eating,
so that people understand
what those words mean.
>>DOUILLARD: Well, I
publish a recipe list
and a grocery list
and a super food
list for every single
month of the year for free.
Anybody can get it.
So you begin to
realize that, oh,
in the winter when
it's cold and dry,
the squirrels are
eating nuts and seeds.
It's a higher fat, higher
protein time of the year.
So we have this higher fat,
higher protein time of the year
that happens in the winter.
We have a low fat, low
carb harvest in the spring,
when there's really
nothing harvested.
It's the calorie restricted,
intermittent fasting
time of the year.
And then we have summer, where
we eat more and more carbs,
and in the fall, lots of carbs
to store energy for winter
and insulate us for winter.
The diet dramatically shifts.
And when you tie
into that, you start
to crave what's in season.
You get the benefits of the
bugs on those foods in your gut.
And you start to get
yourself back into rhythm.
>>SUE: And once in rhythm,
then a person feels what?
>>DOUILLARD: You wake up
in the morning refreshed.
You are tired in the evening.
You have energy
throughout the day.
How many people feel
exhausted at the end of day,
are craving Starbucks at
3:00 in the afternoon, wake
up feeling tired and exhausted?
They did a big study
here in Boulder at CU.
They had healthy Boulderites.
And they checked their
circadian rhythms,
their melatonin surges
and cortisol surges.
And the people were surging in
melatonin, which is the sleep
hormone, during the day.
And they took him into the
wilderness-- no phones,
no cell phones, no
nothing for a week.
And within one week, they 100%
reset their circadian clock.
They did it for a weekend,
67% start restoration
of their circadian clock.
Take a no artificial
light weekend.
Turn off the Wi-Fi.
Turn off your cell phone.
Don't turn on any electricity,
any lights at all.
Use a candle and just
reset your rhythms.
All you have to do is just
unplug and we reconnect it.
>>SUE: I also notice-- and
I actually remember having
a conversation with you about
this about 15 years ago--
that there's a difference
between looking at-- you're
driving down the road.
There's a difference between
looking at the flowers that
are blooming in the spring and
seeing how beautiful they are,
versus really experiencing them.
Just dropping into
this state of exchange
and being completely
present with what
you're observing in nature.
So better than just
taking a walk in nature,
having a deep
experience with nature
as you're walking through to
drop into our true vibration
as well?
>>DOUILLARD: I mean, the science
backs up what you just said.
The brainwaves, when they
go really, really slow,
that connects us to
spiritual experience.
It connects us to
what scientists
call the unified field,
or some scientists
are now calling the
Akashic record, where
space and time are sort of one.
So when you are so stimulated
by the outside world
and our brainwaves are going
90 miles an hour all the time,
we don't drop in.
So we've traded that
millions of years
of being totally
in sync and still
with the silence of nature, for
an overstimulated environment.
And we've lost that connection
to our inner space, right?
And the benefits of that
is, like, you actually
are more intuitive.
The science is
there to prove that.
We can have gut feelings
and intuition and intuitive
decision-making, and have
spiritual experiences
and know things that a lot
of psychics sort of have.
We all have that ability.
But we've traded in for being
stimulated and distracted
by our senses.
And Ayurveda talks
about using the senses
as avenues of conciousness to
bring your attention within.
So we come to our senses and
become more self-aware, as
opposed to being only
stimulated by what's out there.
So the science shows if we
can slow down those brainwaves
and take that into our conscious
mind, amazing things happen.
>>SUE: We start to
develop a sense of self,
where we have less anxiety
and we stress less.
And we're able to
be more present.
And the body, then,
is able to self-heal.
And to generate its own healing
process is its true nature.
>>DOUILLARD: Let the
truth of you out.
That's the whole point.
All Veda-- anything that says
Vedic science, or Ayurveda,
or Dhanurveda, or all the
different Vedic aspects,
they're all designed
for one thing--
to free who you
truly are, to help us
get on the path of
our highest evolution.
>>SUE: So your book is
called "The 3-Season Diet".
And I know people
are wondering, what
happened to the fourth season?
What's going on?
So you need to share a
little bit with everyone.
>>DOUILLARD: Well, there's
four seasons, of course.
We didn't throw
that one out yet.
But there's three
growing seasons.
So we interact with
nature in the spring
with a spring harvest,
which is pretty austere.
We have a summer harvest,
which is quite different
than the spring harvest-- more
carbs and less fats, or even
more carbs and more fets,
just more fuel for the winter.
And then we have an
end-of-summer harvest,
which is, you know, the one that
lasts us through the winter--
all the nuts and
seeds and grains
that last through
the winter are there.
And nature, from its
perspective, giving us food,
takes a break.
Everything in nature is based
on cycles of rest and activity.
And its resting cycle is winter.
So we have winter,
summer, spring harvests
that we eat from.
And those are tied to the three
doshas of Vata, Pitta, Kapha.
So that's the trilogy
that Ayurveda talks about.
>>SUE: And then the
relationship there
between the human biome
that gets established,
what cultivates there?
>>DOUILLARD: In terms
of the microbiome?
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: I
mean, the microbiome
is also shifting from
winter to summer to spring.
So when we align our
intestinal tract,
which is our most important
protective barrier
from the outside world.
And Ayurveda, they say
85% of all imbalances
come from digestion.
And if your digestive
skin lining breaks down,
that allows toxins
and impurities
to move into your lymph, which
is the biggest circulatory
system in your body.
It delivers fats for energy to
every single cell of your body.
It carries your immune system.
It's your detoxification system.
So if that system breaks
down or becomes congested,
you gain weight.
You get moody.
You become depressed.
You don't have any energy,
become chronically fatigued.
And new research shows
that even the brain
drains lymphatic
waste to the tune
of 3 pounds of toxic chemicals
and plaque out of your brain
every year while you sleep.
And your big lymphs in
your muscles and stuff,
they move and drain while
you move throughout the day.
But the brain and the
central nervous system
are draining while you sleep.
So if you don't sleep
good, you don't drain good.
And if you don't have
good lymphatic drainage,
you won't sleep
very well, either.
So the lymphatic
system in Ayurveda
is the first system
we evaluate and treat,
because it's the
drainage system.
If the drains are clogged in
your house, you're in trouble.
You've got to fix that
before you do anything else.
And that's exactly
how the body works.
In Western medicine,
we evaluate the blood.
We take your blood.
We look at your blood
and go, oh, there's
something bad in your blood.
Well, a lot of times, the
thing that's bad in your blood
is because the drainage
system's clogged and things
are backing up into your blood.
So it just makes
more logical sense
to put your attention
on your lymphatic system
as the first line of
defense for optimal health.
Because it drains everything.
>>SUE: So we know
the body protects
the bloodstream and
its chemistries as long
as it possibly can.
So if we're addressing
something before it shows up
in the bloodstream, we're
heading things off at the pass
in such a more
preventive manner.
And you're speaking about
living a lifestyle that
allows us to not
have to constantly
be on the diagnostic
search, what's wrong,
and being tested for
what's wrong all the time.
But rather, let's live in a
way that promotes wellness,
and a sense of self,
and a connection
to nature, which is
our true destiny, how
we're supposed to be operating.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
My most recent book,
it's called "Eat Wheat".
And I had two debates
with David Perlmutter,
the author of "Grain Brain".
And I made the case that
it's not a grain brain issue.
It's a brain drain issue.
We have lost the ability
because of processed foods
and bad fats--
polyunsaturated fatty
acids that replace
saturated fats in
1960, when they told us
cholesterol was bad.
And they replaced it with
canola oil and Crisco,
and things like that.
Those fats are indigestible.
And they break down
our digestive system.
And therefore, we
don't have the ability
to break down things
like wheat and gluten.
And as you know, you can
take wheat and dairy out
of someone's diet.
But in short order,
the problems come back.
And now, wheat and dairy have
become public enemy number
one and number two.
And if you take them out of
your diet, you feel better.
But have we fixed the reason
why you're not feeling good
when you digest those foods?
I'm all about taking them out.
But let's fix the problem.
And if you don't break those
foods down the way you should,
they go undigested into
your intestinal tract.
They're too big to
get into your blood.
So where do they go?
They get uptaken
into the garbage can,
which is your lymphatic system.
And they clog your lymph.
And they make weight around
your belly or in your hips.
The lymph delivers energy
to every fat as energy
to every cell of your body.
And if you can't deliver
that fat as energy,
you're exhausted.
So people get tired.
We have skin-associated lymphs,
where the body dumps it out
as your skin as rashes that
people get when they eat wheat.
And we have brain fog, which
is when the brain lymphs get
so congested because you took
all those proteins that you
should have digested
that you've been
eating not for 10,000 years,
for 3 and 1/2 million years.
We've found gluten in the
teeth of ancient humans
3 and 1/2 million years ago.
So this is not a new thing.
And that wheat, by the
way, had more gluten in it
than the wheat we have today.
So, again, makes you
wonder if gluten's really
the public enemy number one.
And they found that that
gluten will find its way
into the lymph, clog the lymph.
Now the brain can't drain
and you get brain fog.
So it's not a grain brain
issue, it's a brain drain issue.
And that's why Ayurveda says,
let's fix the digestion.
Let's turn that thing back on.
Let's detoxify the lymph and
the gallbladder, and the liver.
And decongest the body and
turn on the digestive system
the way it was designed.
Part of that was
seasonal eating and kind
of troubleshooting digestion.
And bring our ability
to digest foods back,
because those
hard-to-digest foods are
the triggers of the stimulants
for an immune response.
We have an immune
system, gut immunity,
because we ate poisonous
foods-- goitrogens, oxalates,
nightshades-- these foods--
glutens, anti-nutrients,
lectins--
they are the triggers
for an immune response.
If you just say, I feel bad when
I eat them, and take them out
of the diet and don't
fix the problem, what's
going to happen to
our immune response?
We already see the
studies showing
people who are gluten-free
have four times more mercury
in their blood than the
people who eat wheat.
They have less good bugs, more
bad bugs, and less killer T
cells than people who eat wheat.
The science is already
here, suggesting that this,
just fixing the symptom--
don't eat X, Y, and Z, and eat
a more purified simple diet--
leaves us immune-compromised.
Just like taking
cholesterol out of the diet
caused more heart disease,
more obesity, more diabetes,
and more depression,
what's going to happen
with this new crazy idea--
take wheat, dairy,
lectins out of our diet--
without strengthening
the digestive strength
and supporting an
immune response?
It's going to leave us way more
vulnerable to the super bugs
down the road, which are
right around the corner
when antibiotics
fail on us, right?
So we keep just going
after treating symptoms
and never looking at the cause.
And it's a dangerous
road to hoe.
>>SUE: It's so symbolic.
It's symbolic about how
we're approaching everything,
you know.
We're pieces and
parts, and becoming
mechanistic about our
approach to having a better
idea than what nature had
in store from the beginning.
And so what you're doing
is encouraging us to like,
just stop.
Just time out, here.
It's not about the latest
fad and the latest research
that is showing that if
you do this, this happens.
It's about, let's look
at the whole picture.
Let's remember that
we are whole beings.
And let's allow that whole
being to have a life.
And that, in turn, turns
this digestive system on
and allows drainage to occur,
and allows the immune system
to do what it's built
to do, without us trying
to think for this
miraculous system
that we have in place here.
So you're basically
also saying, though,
that there is a season
where your digestion might
be stronger for
certain types of things
and other things, et cetera.
So to draw the conclusion
that I can't tolerate
that is perhaps a fallacy
as well, that maybe I'm
eating the wrong thing
at the wrong time
because I'm just out of touch.
Can you--
>>DOUILLARD: Great science
to back that up too.
I mean, the enzyme for
wheat is called amylase.
We expressed the gene
to make our own amylase
about 2 million
years ago, suggesting
that we are enough
starch in our diet
to create our own enzyme
for digesting starch
about 2 million years ago.
That enzyme today, in
your body and my body--
still to this day--
increases inside of us
in the fall, and less
in the spring and the summer.
So we make the enzyme
for wheat, guess what?
When it's harvested.
The digestive parasympathetic
nervous system
increases in the colder
climate to break down
nuts and seeds and
grains and meats
that you would need
to eat in the winter,
because you can't take
anything out of your garden.
In the summertime, the
foods are cooked on the vine
and you don't have
to digest them.
And you need increasing
digestive fire
in the summer when
it's super hot,
was one of our
strategies to survive
as homosapiens, where the
Neanderthals didn't do that.
We survived because we
have the weighted ability
to dissipate heat.
One of those ways was not
to cook this massive--
stoke this massive
digestive fire
in the middle of the summer.
Although we do that
now because we can go
into an air conditioned house.
So we've lost that connection.
And it's just such
logical science
to say, hey, we have the ability
to digest wheat and grains
at a certain time of the year.
And in the
springtime, right now,
if you and I were
living off the land,
where are we going
to get any grain?
What?
There is none.
So it's a grain-free.
The dairy is for the baby cow.
You go in there and
try to get the milk out
from the mama cow for the baby
cow, that ain't gonna happen.
Strap them down,
or whatever, right?
So it's a grain-free, dairy-free
time of the year right now
in the spring.
And then, come summer,
the rules change.
We've just got to
get back into that.
And it doesn't mean you have
to only eat seasonal food.
The idea is, think about
what you should eat more of.
Get medicinal dosage of what's
in season and enjoy your life.
Get rid of the processed food.
That's a real important
piece of the puzzle.
Organic food, because
the pesticides
that they spray on our
food kill the microbes that
make the enzymes to help us
digest the hard-to-digest stuff
like wheat, dairy, grains,
lectins, and those things.
So if you eat a lot
of non-organic food,
you're going to be
killing a lot of bugs that
help you have good digestion.
So that's another
piece of the puzzle.
>>SUE: Yeah.
Now you also speak
about how often
to eat small meals, large
meals, how often during the day.
Can you speak about that?
>>DOUILLARD: You know, in
India, there's an old saying.
It says, one meal a
day is for a yogi.
Two meals is for a bogey, which
is a working class person.
They need more food because
they're doing physical labor.
And three meals a
day is for a rogie,
who is a sick person,
mostly dead in a hospital.
They don't have a name for
four, five, and six meal a day
people.
Because you're mostly
good at three, right?
>>SUE: It's called
western world.
That's when we're
doing six meals a day.
>>DOUILLARD: But
the cool thing is,
you know, the culture is saying,
hey, intermittent fasting,
time-restricted eating,
it's a big thing.
This is not new.
Ayurveda said one meal a
day thousands of years ago,
two meals a day max, you know?
We're eating three,
five, six meals a day.
It's crazy.
We eat way too much.
And now we know that
when you don't eat,
you produce autophagy,
which is the cleaning
of your lymphatic
system and restoring
bad cells into good cells,
and doing some repair.
It increases stem
cell activation.
We rebuild and rejuvenate.
These were things that Ayurveda
talked about thousands of years
ago.
There's something
called Kaya Kalpa,
the rejuvenation of the body.
And I've written some
articles recently about that.
And we have a cleanse called
the Kaya Kalpa cleanse, which
is coming out very
soon, all about how
to mimic the ancient wisdom
and the modern science
about autophagy and stem
cell activation by doing what
Ayurvedists had to do thousands
of years ago on a four or five
day cleanse.
Super easy.
>>SUE: So cutting-edge
thought is
to rediscover what we've
known for thousands of years.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>SUE: It's pretty amazing.
>>DOUILLARD: It
always amazes me.
This is why, in my
website at lifespa.com,
we write all about ancient
wisdom and modern science.
And I thought when
I first started,
I'd write two or three articles.
And I'd like, done.
We have thousands
of articles online.
I'm so blown away constantly
by how much they knew
and how insightful they were
about the subtlety of nature.
And what they knew
was something--
I think, the most profound
thing, is that the most subtle
it is, the most powerful it is.
They talked about
the microbiome.
They called them
Krimi in Ayurveda
3,500 years ago before Christ--
5,000 years ago, total.
I mean, how did they know
that the microbiome existed?
Because they couldn't see them.
But they wrote about them.
They wrote about
how to fix them.
It's amazing.
>>SUE: Yeah.
It's a very fascinating thing.
I know that we were together
in some various meditation
practices in India
and in the US.
And one of the things that
started to happen for me,
when my third eye
opened, was that I
could start to see the internal
architecture inside my brain.
I could start to
see these things.
And I could start to witness
the flow of different fluids
through different
systems within mine.
And I recognized that what
you're speaking about,
I believe, is quite
possibly, that they
were able to perceive on this
super, super subtle level,
and could be in touch with
the rhythms of nature--
and how these tiny
particles were
moving together
and creating life,
and be in touch with that.
And they were recording what
they were able to observe.
So this is what you're
speaking about now,
that that is behind
this information that
is based in Ayurveda today.
>>DOUILLARD: The
lymphatics in the brain
we talked about,
newly-discovered eight years
ago at University of Virginia.
Now they realize that
when these get congested,
they're linked to anxiety,
depression, cognitive decline,
inflammation, infection,
and autoimmune conditions.
Ayurveda developed,
5,000 years ago,
techniques to clean
out those brains.
New science shows that those
lymphs drain into one place,
into the lymphs in your nose.
So they developed a
technique thousands of years
ago called nossia,
where you sniff
medically herbally-infused
oils into your nose
after you heat and lubricate
and massage your head,
to open up these channels
so you can clean out
the sagittal sinus where all
these brain lymphs are located.
I've written articles
showing pictures
of where the brain lymphs
were thousands of years ago,
and what they've
recently discovered.
And they're identical.
And they knew exactly where
these drained into the nose.
We only just figured
that out eight years ago.
And they had therapies
to clean them out.
And I used those for 26 years
when I did deep rejuvenation,
to carry people through
retreats and detox retreats.
And the emotional
transformation,
the release of all emotional
trauma was unbelievable.
If you don't get those
blocks out of your brain,
we hold onto those
old emotional traumas
and we just don't let them go.
It's a big important
piece of the puzzle.
And I've written an article
about a step-by-step procedure
of how to do that at home.
People can watch it and
read it and go, wow.
This is the original
technique to free yourself
from all the emotional
trauma and let
yourself open those delicate
petals of your flower.
And let yourself
be more vulnerable.
And let something
real and more truthful
out, and not be
constantly interacting
with life based on your
protective patterns.
>>SUE: Yes.
So I work with bioenergetics,
and the emotional impact on how
energy flows through the
body, and our ability
to understand what's
happening in ourselves
and our interior realm,
and in our exterior realm,
and in the combination
of those two.
And it's commonly
known that sinuses
are related to
longstanding grief that is
unresolved, unresolved emotion.
And it's one of the
number one reasons
that the right hemisphere
and the left hemisphere
of the brain aren't
interacting any longer.
And what you're describing right
here along this sagittal line,
it makes perfect
sense that clearing
that is going to allow us
to operate as a whole being,
rather than just a right-brained
or left-brained focused
individual.
And again, finding our
wholeness and allowing healing.
>>DOUILLARD: Do I have
time for a quick story?
>>SUE: Sure.
>>DOUILLARD: So this
one woman came to me.
And she had a hyperthyroid
issue, her goiter in her neck
that was as big as a
grapefruit in her neck.
And she wanted me to treat it.
And we ended up giving her
some of these treatments
to clean out the brain.
And because there's such an
emotional unraveling there,
I always gave them, like,
some journaling to do
and some self-injury practices.
And she said after her third
treatment of cleaning out
this sagittal sinus--
it was like a Mohawk
haircut, exactly where it is.
She said she was sitting
there writing in her journal,
and she had this epiphany.
She said, I was
watching myself be
abused when I was 14 years old.
She said, it was really crazy.
I completely blocked
that out of my mind.
I didn't remember it.
But what was really
even more striking
was I wasn't so affected
by the event itself.
What I was really
struck by was my life
before the event--
happy-go-lucky child.
The event happened, and then
I became this hypervigilant,
90-hour-a-week corporate
executive stressed-out
individual-- color-coded closet,
just everything had to be
perfect for her to be safe.
And she said, I saw that life.
I saw my life before.
I saw that event.
And she goes, it wasn't
great, but it wasn't
worth 25 years of my life.
And she said, I was just
able to just drop it.
See, when you become aware that
the emotional trauma that you
had actually blocked you from
experiencing your truth--
her life, her joy,
which is still there--
all she had to do
was just drop it,
and she allowed herself
to actually start
to experience joy.
Within the week
of that treatment,
her goiter completely
disappeared.
Her thyroid numbers
came down 400 points.
Within six months, her
thyroid completely normalized.
I saw her last
Christmas in Denver
after like 15 years or
something-- a long time.
She came back with
two kids in tow,
running up to me
saying, Dr. John.
I just want you to meet
my little girls, who
wouldn't be here
because of that event,
because she had that old trauma,
and I think, probably not
a color-coded closet anymore.
The point is that we hold
onto these emotions, molecules
of emotion we store.
In Ayurveda, it's
called mental ama.
We store them on our fat, and
our muscle, and in our brain
so we don't have
to feel the pain.
But we bridge around it.
And we create patterns
of protective behavior
that keep us from
accessing who we truly are.
And that's what
Ayurveda was all about.
And they developed a
technique to clean that out.
We are light years away
from that to this day.
You know, I write
about all the research
in the journals about the
lymphatic flow and all that.
They say it takes about
25 years for that research
to hit medical practice.
So it's going to be a long time
before we see any real therapy
revolving around lymphatic
flow or freeing up
our emotions that are real deep
at the physiological level.
>>SUE: And it's so, so
important that we're
putting these pieces together
and allowing ourselves
to land back in the truth that
we are whole and complete.
There's nothing broken.
There's nothing missing.
There's nothing wrong.
We have what it takes.
It's just a matter of connecting
the dots again and sitting down
inside ourselves and
letting it be true.
>>DOUILLARD: True.
It's inside of us.
>>SUE: Yes.
For thousands of
years, Ayurvedic wisdom
has held the belief
that toxins in the body
can cause overall
health imbalance.
Once again, ancient wisdom
precedes modern science.
Take a look.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>SUJATHA REDDY: If you are
eating in a rushed, hurried way
and just gobbling up your
food and you are really
not secreting the juices and
giving it time to digest,
the food is going
to pass through
without being digested properly.
And it is going to form what
we call as ama in Ayurveda.
That is toxins.
And those toxins are going
to be absorbed in our system
and manifest in the form
of discomfort or disease.
It is going to put
us out of balance.
That is why these days, you
see a lot of imbalances.
Whether it is children
or families or adults,
not mindful about
these routines is
making us more sick than ever.
>>SUE: What is the
most common imbalance?
>>DOUILLARD: Digestive.
It all starts in the digestive.
And what she said
there is so valuable.
But the science is basic.
When you're
stressed, you produce
the fight-or-flight
stress response.
That fight-or-flight, when
you're running away from a bear
up a tree, there's
zero digestive fuel.
>>SUE: Right, not going
waste the energy on that.
>>DOUILLARD: It's
totally turned off.
>>SUE: Run from the bear.
>>DOUILLARD: Totally turned off.
>>SUE: Right.
>>DOUILLARD: But
when you relax, you
activate the opposite
nervous system, called
the parasympathetic
nervous system,
called the rest-and-digest
nervous system, which
is turned on.
So when you're eating, like she
said, on the run-- on the run--
the reason why the food goes
undigested, like she said,
is because we literally
have turned off
our ability to digest anything.
So we think how many people
are eating their food in front
of the TV, in front
of a scary movie,
in their car driving,
on the run, go.
Eat it.
Inhale.
Go, go, go.
This is insanity, really, when
you think about our ability
to actually have a
nervous system, which
turns on your digestion, to be
able to actually pull that off.
It's just complete, basic,
logical science 101.
>>SUE: And the more you do it,
the more your body craves it.
And it just keeps
perpetuating that cycle
and living in that fashion.
>>DOUILLARD: Because
if you don't actually
completely digest it, the
brain never gets the message
that you ate.
I chewed it.
I swallowed it.
I knew it was coming.
>>SUE: I saw it.
>>DOUILLARD: But it never came.
So what does the brain do?
It sends more hormone to
say, hey, I'm still hungry.
I never got what you guys ate.
I don't know where it went,
but it didn't come here.
So we crave more,
crave more, crave more.
>>SUE: Yeah.
We're associating the more
need and more lack, more--
>>DOUILLARD: And the
undigested part of that food
that you talked about,
where does it go?
Into the garbage can,
which is the collecting
ducts of your
lymphatic system, which
is the lion's share of that
lines your intestinal tract.
And that's trying
to deliver energy
to every cell of your body.
So that ain't going to happen.
You're going to be
exhausted and the brain's
going to go, where'd
that fuel go?
I didn't get it.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: Right?
>>SUE: Right.
So let's circle the wagons
for just a second, and say,
what does the
lymphatic system do?
Let's just make sure
all of our viewers
are able to get the
value of this system.
Because usually, people only
hear about the lymphatic system
when they ask if the disease had
spread to the lymphatic system.
And that's really
what all people know.
So let's educate some people
about the lymphatic system.
>>DOUILLARD: Super easy.
Three things, number 1,
the lion's share of it
lines your intestinal tract.
So what is it doing?
It's taking fats
that are properly
digested to every cell of
your body for baseline energy.
Without that, you're
exhausted, chronic fatigue.
Number 2, it carries
your immune system.
If that immune system
is stuck in traffic,
your immune system
is not going to know,
do I send one firetruck
to the fire on Broadway?
Do I send 100?
It doesn't know.
It overreacts or underreacts.
An overreaction is an autoimmune
condition, underreaction,
other bad things happen.
You become sick.
And then the final thing it
does is it's the garbage can.
Any undigested
food, like mercury
that are on all our organic
vegetables from the coal mine
plumes--
or gluten, or
undigested proteins,
or lectins that we have
blamed as the big problem--
they go undigested.
They get uptaken into the
collecting ducts of your lymph.
And they clog it up.
So you have all these lymphy
things, skin rashes, brain fog,
tiredness, lethargy.
This is absolutely
a predicted event
because you did not break
those foods down properly.
So that's what it does.
It's a garbage can.
It's a carrier of
your immune system.
And it's a delivery
of fats for energy
to every cell of your body.
It's important stuff.
>>SUE: No kidding.
So it's kind of like this
unconditional friend that
is standing there waiting
for you to do everything
that you do.
And they're there to
pick up the pieces.
And when we're
completely unconscious,
it has a lot of
pieces to pick up.
And we're overworking it.
>>DOUILLARD: So let me
give you a couple of things
that they might relate to.
When it's congested, you could
get brain fog, tiredness,
lethargy, skin rashes,
swelling, toenail funguses.
Rings get tight on your fingers.
Belly fat, hip fat, cellulite,
allergy, sinus congestion,
headaches.
You're worse in the morning
because the lymph pools.
You're stiff in the morning.
Pain that moves around
your body, joint issues--
these are the things
that most people have.
And these are the early
symptoms that happen.
And then, when that
gets congested,
the default for all those
toxins is they take it back
to the liver.
And then it starts to
screw with your ability
to digest hard-to-digest foods,
because your liver makes bile.
And if your bile is
not made, the bile
is a buffer for the
acid in your stomach.
And if you don't
have good bile flow,
you're not going
to make acid, which
means you're not going to cook
any hard-to-digest food, right?
So if you want to
make acid, you've
got to have somebody
put that fire out.
That's your bile.
No bile, no acid.
No acid, no bile.
So if your liver is
congested because of years
of intestinal irritation, lymph
congestion, and now the toxins
are congesting your liver
and your gall bladder
eating processed food
and bad fats that all
go to your gallbladder anyway--
number one abdominal
surgery in America
today, gallbladder removal
surgery from all the
processed bad fats they
put as preservators
in all of our food.
The bread has oil in it
that keeps it squishy
on the shelf for a month.
Bread used to, like,
last for a day.
That's why bakers
had a job every day.
Now they can bake bread
once every three months
and the bread's still squishy.
Those oils that are the
preservatives in our food,
they're not digestible.
Otherwise, the bugs would've
ate them on the counter.
>>SUE: Right.
It's like, if the bugs
don't eat it, don't eat it.
>>DOUILLARD: And that's
all we eat, as processed
foods in the grocery store.
And it all goes right to your
liver, congests your liver.
Gallbladder has become
congested, bile becomes thick.
No bile, no acid.
No bile, no poop.
Bile makes you poop, by the way.
That keeps everything moving.
It cleanses your villi
in your intestinal skin.
And when that liver gets
congested because the lymph got
congested first--
that's the first thing--
then the liver and the blood
backed up to your blood.
That's exactly what
we talked about.
First, the lymph, the
drains, and then the blood.
And that's your liver.
And when that gets
congested, not only does it
push all this oxygen back into
your blood and cause problems,
it doesn't allow
your stomach to make
the acid it needs to break
down the wheat and the dairy,
the hard-to-digest proteins,
or the environmental pollutants
as fats.
And then you end up
with the inability
to digest certain foods,
and you blame the food.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: And
that's what happened.
>>SUE: We're just not
giving the system a chance.
It doesn't have
a fighting chance
with how we're treating it.
>>DOUILLARD: It's so logical.
I just go crazy, because
we have this mental--
this Western medical
model that we're just
going to blame the symptom
and fix the symptom for you,
and not look any further.
But if you're in practice--
I mean, when I was in practice--
1984, I got into practice.
It became very clear to
me that you take people
off wheat and dairy, within six
months, the problem came back.
Give them digestive enzymes,
the problem comes back.
Because we keep trying to
do the job for the body.
We gave them probiotics way
back then, in the dark old ages.
And same thing.
They felt better when
they were on them.
But as soon as they got
off, things came back.
So we weren't really
fixing the problem.
That's what I was sort of
dedicated my practice to, is
understanding, how
can I get the body
to not be dependent
on a pill or a powder,
and establish self-sufficiency?
And that's what I've been
doing my whole entire career,
was helping people get
self-sufficient, reboot
digestive strength.
And along the way, you
realize, oh my god, digestion
links to lymph.
Lymph links to the brain.
Brain links to all
emotional trauma.
And all of a sudden, you're
looking at this whole thing
is connected.
>>SUE: Right.
>>DOUILLARD: It's not just like
you have some emotional trauma.
It's tied to--
everything's connected.
And that's the
beauty of Ayurveda.
It's the one system that really
ties it all together for you.
>>SUE: So instead of
trying to beat the system
and then take out the parts that
aren't working because we're
not doing very well at beating
the system, we're saying,
you know what?
The system isn't so bad.
Let's just get back
in touch with nature.
It has everything that we need.
All we have to do is
reconnect, plug in.
And it not only allows
us to begin to detoxify,
but sets us up for a greater
state of consciousness, which
is available only after
we've got this system working
the way that it's
supposed to-- which
I know we're going to get into.
>>DOUILLARD: Exactly why
Ayurveda was created.
Ayurveda was created because the
body was so dense and so toxic
and so heavy, that we couldn't
experience the subtlety
of our own conscious.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>DOUILLARD: That's
why they did it.
>>SUE: Yeah.
And so-- love it.
So before we jump right
into that, let's just-- one
last thing here,
because on this, I
think it's very
important that people
start to recognize that
sleep plays a role,
meditation plays a role.
And can you just
tie together what
we were just speaking about?
The lymphatic system, and
cleansing and detoxing that.
How does that help for sleep?
And has that set us up
for meditation or higher
consciousness or just being able
to think in more creative ways,
instead of survival?
>>DOUILLARD: Well,
the science on sleep
is just so overwhelming.
If you don't get good sleep,
just about every health concern
imaginable is linked
to poor sleep.
And what we now know
that when you sleep,
the brain drains 3 pounds
of plaque and chemicals
every year while
you sleep at night.
So if you're not
getting good sleep,
what happens to
all those toxins?
They just stay in your
brain, cause all types
of potential issues-- brain
fog, cognitive decline,
things like that.
So sleep is a critical
piece of the puzzle.
But if you're not moving
your body during the day
to get the big lymphs--
because your lymph system,
when you move your
muscles, it pumps lymph.
That's waste out of your body.
So if we're sedentary
sitting all day,
and we don't get the big lymphs
to move and they're congested,
your rings are tight
on your fingers.
Your ankles swell.
You've got skin rashes
and you're breaking out.
And you're tired.
Women, prior to their
menstrual cycle,
there's a premenstrual
lymphatic detox
that give the reproductive
organs a bit of a break.
So prior to your cycle, there's
a lymph detox that takes place.
But if your lymph's
congested, you're
dumping reproductive fluid into
an already congested system,
what happens?
Your breasts swell,
become tender.
You feel PMS-ey, moody,
tired, break out.
So I wrote an article once
called "It May Not Be Hormonal"
because a lot of the symptoms
that women are experiencing
aren't actually hormonal.
They're clogged drains.
The lymph system's congested.
And we would give them an herb,
one herb called manjistha,
and like 80% of my cases,
they were like, these women
would get better.
It wasn't a hormonal issue.
So again, the lymph has so--
it's linked to so many
of our woes and things
that we experienced and saw
how important it is for us
to really understand that.
>>SUE: Yeah.
Thank you for tracking
that together for us.
One of the most
important insights
we can glean from Ayurveda
is the profound and subtle
connection between
the mind and the body.
Let's take a look.
>>PAUL DUGLISS:
Being a physician,
I really understand that
many of the conditions that
are prevalent in our
society are stress-related.
Stress is a huge component.
And it's not something
that modern medicine really
has very efficient
tools to work with.
Contrast that with Ayurveda.
Ayurveda understands
this intimate connection
between mind and body.
It understands how emotions
and emotional perception
and the digestion of emotion
has an impact on our ability
to either ward off stress,
to process it, digest it
and not have it affect us, or
it will have an impact that
is damaging and imbalancing.
>>SUE: So how do we
digest what we call stress
so that it isn't harmful?
>>DOUILLARD: You know,
I think fundamentally,
it has to do with our
lifestyle and our routine.
When I teach doctors
Ayurveda, I always
suggest the first question
you should ask your patients
is, how do you feel between
2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 o'clock
in the afternoon?
This is the Vata time of
the day, the nervous system
time of the day.
So if you're crashing, burning,
craving Starbucks, chocolate,
a stimulant or a nap
in that afternoon,
you've got no gas in your tank.
And you're crashing.
And then you want to
stimulate yourself to get
the energy that you need.
So when you crash, you
trigger a stress response.
And that's a
degenerative chemistry.
And then you stimulate
yourself to get energy.
And then you usually
overshoot the runway,
which means you're going
to store the extra as fat.
Then you crash and burn because
it's short-lived energy, right?
When you crave stuff,
you're not craving--
usually, people
aren't craving nuts.
They're craving some
donut or some injection,
a Snickers bar, or some dark
chocolate, or some coffee.
And that gives them
the up and down energy.
And it leaves them
exhausted and depleted.
So the reason why people are
oftentimes out of balance
is because of how
we handle stress.
And the first golden rule is how
we live in sync or out of sync
with those natural rhythms.
And that means in the middle of
the day, between around noon,
studies are now
showing clearly, this
is where we should eat our
biggest meal of the day.
And then we have
a full tank of gas
to go in the afternoon
between 2:00 and 6:00
when the brain's
saying, give me my fuel.
And I need 80% of the brain
fuel at this point in time.
But if you had
nothing for lunch,
or something in front
of your computer
for lunch, or eating
it on the run for lunch
and it was not digested
properly because you
had the fight-or-flight
system engaged
versus the parasympathetic
rest and digest system engaged,
that food didn't get delivered.
The brain didn't have any fuel.
The brain's coming and
saying, I need my fuel.
Where are you going to get it?
You're going to borrow
from Peter to pay Paul.
One of those places, hormonally,
is women's progesterone,
which converts directly into
cortisol, or stress hormone.
So now it depletes
their hormones.
And they have
reproductive issues.
The body will crave sugar and
affect blood sugar issues.
And then it'll go to your
thyroid and say, hey, you
guys aren't doing anything.
We need to up-regulate a
little metabolic activity.
So now the thyroid goes wonky.
And you start having issues
with having your thyroid
or keeping your
energy levels go.
So the body will
borrow from Peter
to pay Paul to make it happen
and deplete you along the way.
The story I told earlier,
the one with the goiter,
she had burned out her adrenals.
She had burned out her
reproductive issues.
She had blood sugar issues.
She went through all those, then
finally, her thyroid exploded.
She went through
the entire gamut
and was able to
repair and rebuild.
That's the cool thing, is
the body is so repairable.
>>SUE: Yeah.
The thyroid was trying to do
a job it wasn't built to do.
And so it was compromised
because of the whole chain
reaction, all because--
as you found through starting
the cleansing process--
she was then able
to recognize, whoa,
there was a trauma in my life.
The psychological impact that
changed my life thereafter,
which I haven't even
been remembering.
I haven't even been aware of it.
I've just been
compensating for it.
So speak to us about
Ayurvedic psychology.
Bridge those worlds for us.
>>DOUILLARD: Ayurvedic
psychology is realizing that we
are--
that 95% of the things that we
think and say and do as adults
come from impressions
that we all experience
in the first six years of life.
So we are living, having
this discussion pretty much
unconscious.
Because if 95% of stuff we're
saying and thinking about
are coming from
those impressions,
that's just an
amazing statistic.
And most of us are walking
around unconscious.
Ayurvedic psychology--
Ayurveda, in general--
was really about
becoming conscious.
And there's an aspect of
the Vedas called Dhanurveda.
Dhaner, the Dhanurasana
of the Bow Asana.
It has to do with
pulling back the bow.
And the golden four
words in Vedic science
are establish being
and perform action,
or what's called
Yogastha Kuru Karmani.
You pull back the bow.
You establish being.
You take aim.
You hold it really still.
And you take action
from that deep place
of inner peace and calm.
If I'm holding the arrow
and I'm moving it around,
I have no idea what
I'm going to hit.
It's going to be dangerous.
>>SUE: It could go anywhere.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
And it's exponentially
distorted,
if I'm moving this thing around.
But if I establish being
and then take action
and take action from
that place of silence,
it's transformational.
It's a karmic
transformational action.
So the point of Vedic science
is for us to still our body.
Establish being.
Yoga, breathing,
meditation, living in sync
with the natural
cycles, going downstream
with the current of nature.
Being still.
Being in nature.
Restore the silence, the
awareness, and appreciation
of inner space.
And then from that clarity,
bring the body back
into balance.
Vata, Pitta, Kapha.
Bring the body digestion
back into balance.
You become more clear of old
mental emotional patterns
of behavior you created
as a young child,
that helped you greatly at
that point in your life--
but as adults, oftentimes,
are not serving you.
You go home for the
holidays and you're
watching your mom and
dad, or sister or brothers
trigger you like crazy.
And you're actually a
four-year-old again.
Like, well, where do
these emotions come from?
They're stored memories of
stress in your fat cells
that remotely make you think
and do the same dumb stuff again
and again.
But as you become more still and
more self-aware, you then see,
oh, that's what's
happening here.
And then you see that not
just is there a door number
one, the old pattern of doing
the same dumb thing again
and again and again.
You begin to see
there's door number two.
I can-- instead of reacting
to their situation,
I can start to react
based on my truth, which
is to be loving and
joyful and kind.
And that's the trick.
That's the beauty
of self-awareness.
But what most people don't
get is the Vedic prescription
was establish being and
then perform action.
You can't Yoga, breathe,
meditate, and go lie, cheat,
and steal on your life.
You have to follow it up
with real, tangible actions.
Like, if your mom is telling
you, making you irritated,
you have to start
to realize that I
can react to her stress,
which is her desire
to have me love her--
which isn't really her.
It's a protective
pattern she created,
which isn't really her.
And I'm reacting to a version
of her that's not really her,
right, with the version of
me that's not really me.
Because I'm reacting
to a version of her
which isn't really her.
So none of us are really
communicating heart-to-heart.
So Ayurveda was like, we
can become more self-aware.
Look at this game that
the mind has created
to keep you safe and secure.
And we can bypass that.
We can hack that by letting
ourselves take actions that
are a little more vulnerable,
a little bit more delicate,
by acting on what's really true.
I love my mom.
She's crazy and
nutty, but I love her.
And I care about her.
What if I acted on those
things versus reacting
to the things about
her that I don't like?
It's a simple shift
in taking action
based on what's real
versus on what's not real.
>>SUE: Puts us in a
state of creatorship,
rather than just trying to be
a better survivor or reactor.
It allows us to experience
ourselves as, really,
the creatures that we are.
And healing and wholeness
of life uncommon
follows suit once
we take that stand.
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah.
>>SUE: I love the
focused positioning
before you take action.
And then they focus,
and the action
can be reflective of one thing
instead of two separate things
that have us bouncing off
the walls with each other.
>>DOUILLARD: Like, roses were--
I have no idea if
this is true or not.
But roses were, at one
point, didn't have thorns.
And they were edible.
Everybody trampled them.
The pricker bushes
never got trampled.
And the roses were
like, it was too much.
So one of them said, what
if we just grew some thorns
like the pricker bushes.
They'd stop trampling us.
They wouldn't eat us.
It was a big thing, right?
So they took a vote.
And they voted on thorns.
We'll put them under the leaves,
then no one will notice, right?
Well, they ended
up having thorns.
And when people are trampled in
their life over a long period
of time, they grow thorns.
So what they project
into the world
is sometimes some
thorny behavior,
which isn't so easy to love.
But when you realize,
through awareness,
that they're just
a rose with thorns,
and instead of judging
them or pushing away--
or if they throw a dart at
you, throw a dart back--
you realize that that's
just me reacting to them.
I'm doing them.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: But
what if I did me?
And the science is clear.
When we love, give,
care, and help
others, our telomeres--
which are based
on our longevity-- lengthen.
We produce the longevity
hormone, oxytocin.
Epigenetically, when
we give from our heart,
it changes the genetic code.
If I give you a gift
and I hope you like it,
it's called hedonistic giving.
If I give you a gift and
I don't care if you like,
I just fell in love with
giving you this gift,
it's called eunomic giving.
Eunomic giving literally
changes the genetic code
in a positive way.
When I give you a
gift and I'm not
expecting anything in return,
your genes can feel it,
can feel the difference.
For me, like, having a
little hook, do you like it?
Is it the right size?
Am I getting some
juice out of it?
That's the other
half of the equation.
Establish being, perform
action, and the other half is
don't be attached to the
fruits of your actions.
It's tricky stuff.
It's the game of life.
But when you realize
that you're constantly
needing all that approval and
appreciation of everybody else,
and you realize when and where
that's happening in your life,
that's when you take
action to free yourself
from those old patterns.
And the fruit ripens on
the tree in sequence.
You don't have to
do it all at once.
It's too much.
So you just chip away in life.
And you realize in
this relationship,
in this relationship,
I can do better.
I can be me.
I don't have to react to them.
>>SUE: So we have this
beautiful conversation
about being the creator,
being the impetus of your life
experience to the degree
that it can change your very
genetic coding, your DNA,
your expression-- therefore,
of course, your health.
And if you express disease
in your life or not,
or if you have vitality
in your world--
all through the power of
thought and focusing our mind.
And we have another
conversation about nutrition
and changing how
we eat, and what
we're trying to outrun
there-- and dropping
into circadian eating
and allowing nature
to be a guide for us.
Where would one start?
And I know that it's
neither this nor that.
But where would you suggest?
Someone's watching this.
They're like, whoa, lots
of fantastic information.
Where do I begin?
Do I begin changing
my ability to embrace
and to be loving and giving and
more unconditional in my life?
Do I start with my eating and
assessing what's happening?
>>DOUILLARD: Couple of things.
Get out in nature
as much as you can.
When you eat your food,
stop, take time, and relax.
And eat your food, you know?
Do your very best to
eat the best quality
food that you can eat.
And then be a little more
conscious in your interactions
with other people.
And try to take what I call
random acts of kindness--
little, like, hey.
Just thinking about you today.
Hope you're having a great day.
A text, a note, just a little
bit of love goes a long way.
Because a lot of times, I ask
my students oftentimes, like,
how many of you
have a relationship?
And how many of you
love your partner?
And they're all, yes, we do.
How many of you find
yourself holding back
loving your partner?
And they all raise
their hand like--
And I go like, why do you hold
back loving someone that you
truly just said you love?
>>SUE: Bargaining, negotiating.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
Because the mind is
all about mathematics.
You know, if I give you a
birthday present for 20 bucks,
and you give me one
from the dollar store,
my mind goes, you owe me $19.
And I'm going to do whatever
it takes to get my $19 back.
And that means I'm not going to
love you that much for a while.
>>SUE: Right.
Or, I'm just not
going to show you.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
You're passive
aggressive, or something.
I'm going to do something.
And that emotion that we created
as a result of feeling slighted
goes into my fat.
And it's stored as a memory.
And I consciously react based
on that old protective stress.
So we have to become
more self-aware
and go, wow, that's
what I'm doing.
How can I start acting on
something more truthful?
And that starts with just
random acts of kindness.
And then once you
get good at that
and you start laying down some
neural pavement your brain
to say it's OK to give and to
love, and to care, and to be
kind-- and just to do the
random act of kindness thing,
you can start to respond to
feelings of being afflicted
with affection.
So when they throw
a dart at you,
you realize that they're just
a rose that had been trampled.
Let it go by, and we
respond with compassion
and understanding.
And all of a sudden,
game changer.
>>SUE: Simple
things, like, I know
you didn't really mean that.
And I know that
you really do care.
And even though I understand
that you're upset right now,
but I know that's
not who you are.
Just that recognition
changes the game
for someone in an instant.
>>DOUILLARD: Completely.
>>SUE: Seemingly
impossible to change
such a hot dynamic situation
with a simple, loving response.
>>DOUILLARD: But if we don't
train ourselves to pull back
the bow and become
more still, we're
just lost in the stimulation
of the mind, which
is all about needing to
be appreciated, approved
of, and loved and cared
for by the outside world.
And if I don't get
that feeling from you,
then I'm going to
figure out a way
to get that feeling from you.
And that means I'm
going to manipulate you.
And you're going to know
I'm manipulating you.
And that's not going
to feel good to you.
So you're going to react to
me based on some resentment
from me manipulating you.
The world goes on, right?
We drop bombs on countries
because of that kind of stuff.
>>SUE: Yeah.
And then we have, in
the interpersonal world,
the divorce rate, what it is.
And suicide, where it is, and
this feeling of hopelessness
and lack of self.
And it's all stemming
from exactly what
we're speaking about here.
So we can turn it.
We can change it.
And it's right here in front
of us to take, to have.
All we have to do is accept it.
>>DOUILLARD: I told my
kids, I was talking to them.
You know, I've worked with
Deepak for many years.
And one of his original
famous quotes was--
I was telling my kids this.
I said, did you know that
the space inside your cells
is proportionally as void
as intergalactic space?
And they're like, what?
I go, and you guys
aren't even interested
in intergalactic space.
You're just interested in
the space around your house
or in your life, in your
cell phone-- whatever.
>>SUE: We don't even
think about that stuff.
>>DOUILLARD: What about
the inner space, you know?
I just feel like we need
to encourage it and create
some attraction.
We need to put some bait
in the inner space world
to get people to realize it's
so much more fascinating.
And this is so much
more distracting
and temporary than turning the
pendulum swing to come back
to something that's more real.
I think it's got to
happen soon, because I
can't think the pendulum can
go too further off the chart--
>>SUE: Into dispersal
and distraction.
>>DOUILLARD: Exactly.
>>SUE: Yeah.
Well, I think that it is
making a turn just because
of the crazy that our culture
is experiencing right now.
People are starting to search.
Like, what do I do differently?
This is maddening, what
we're living in as a culture.
So perhaps hope
is on the horizon.
>>DOUILLARD: I think so.
>>SUE: Quantum
science has given us
new insights about the
nature of our reality
and the subtle
power of intention
within the physical universe.
Let's take a look
at what is known
as the observer effect,
explained by Dr. Theresa
Bullard.
>>THERESA BULLARD:
In quantum physics,
we talk about there being many
simultaneous possibilities
and probabilities
all existing at once.
Until a measurement,
or observation--
a.k.a.
a choice is made.
Now upon observation, one
of those possibilities
will manifest out while,
the others will disappear.
This is known as
the observer effect
and collapsing the wave form.
How was this observer
effect discovered?
It relates to another
aspect of complementarity
known as wave particle duality.
In the early days of
quantum discovery,
it began with scientists
trying to understand
the nature of light.
Is it a wave?
Or is it a particle?
It turns out, light
displays both behaviors.
Now this confronted scientists
with a mystery or paradox.
How can light be both
a wave and a particle?
The paradigm at the time
said it must be either
or, not both and.
And the mystery
grew when scientists
began to wonder whether matter
also could behave as both wave
and particle.
And indeed, it could.
There have been many
indications and new discoveries
in quantum physics that
have confirmed all of this.
Now to make a long story short,
if they set up the experiment
to see if it's a
wave, then indeed,
they get wave-like behavior.
But if they set
up the experiment
to try and observe
it as a particle,
then the behavior changes
to that of a particle.
It's all about how
the scientists choose
to set up their observation
or measurement points.
Now what's
fascinating is that it
is as if the quanta are aware
that they're being observed.
The very act of observing
has a dramatic effect
on their behavior.
It is a real phenomenon.
>>SUE: So basically, we
create what we're looking for.
It generates in the
presence of our observation.
This is related to work
that you're doing currently.
Can you explain about
your recent work
on Ayurvedic psychology?
>>DOUILLARD: Absolutely.
You know, I'm so fascinated
by quantum physics
because it so directly
describes Vedic science.
And in Ayurveda, there's a term
for the cause of all disease,
and it's called the
mistake of the intellect,
where the intellect--
or in Vedic science,
called pragya-aparadh, which is
the mistake of the intellect.
The intellect starts
to think of itself
as separate from the underlying
field of consciousness
from which we came.
The Grand Unified Field theories
now are pretty conclusive,
in that the field that
everything comes from
is intelligent.
It's informed.
There's something intelligent,
godlike, superior,
supreme intelligence about that.
So Ayurvedic medicine says
that the cause of disease
takes place right at
the junction point
where the field of
intelligence becomes matter.
And the matter
forgets that it's part
of the field of intelligence.
It's the loss of memory
of pure consciousness.
We start functioning
as parts, as opposed
to the sum of the parts.
The whole is greater than
the sum of the parts, right?
We all have heard that.
So when the parts start
to function independently
from the whole,
they lose the memory
of how to work as
part of the system.
They become rogue.
They become cancer cells.
Bad things happen.
That's the cause.
That was predicted as the cause
of disease thousands of years
ago.
So now we know that Vedic
science said that if you could
put your attention at the
junction point between
consciousness and matter, where
the matter forgot that it was
consciousness-- and you could
put yourself right at that
junction point--
you could then be
aware and restore
the memory of pure
consciousness into the matter.
If I was living in
the consciousness,
I wouldn't have
access to the matter.
If I'm living in the matter,
I wouldn't have access
to the consciousness.
But if I could stick myself
right at the junction point,
I would be like a lamp
at the door, right?
Shine both ways.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>DOUILLARD: That's what
all Vedic healing was about.
Yoga, breathing, meditation,
they're all designed to still
you to bring your
attention-- touch therapies,
pulse diagnosis--
all designed to
bring your attention
to the junction point between
consciousness and matter.
And now, guess what?
We have these things
called photons,
which are, by definition,
consciousness field and matter,
or field and physiology.
So we have these
things called photons,
which are literally the junction
point between consciousness
and matter.
And that's indisputable.
We also now have new
science to suggest
that there are
these things called
biophotons, which
you and I receive
and transmit all day long.
And the science suggests
that these biophotons
live in our DNA.
And they're
information-carrying molecules--
particles, or wave forms--
that carry information at
great distances within our body
and without our body
at the speed of light.
Einstein called it spooky
action at a distance,
that if I observe
something here,
it can change something light
years away instantaneously.
And these are photons that
he was describing, which she
was describing on the video.
We now know that--
this is crazy, right--
that these biophotons
are affected and changed
by our intention.
And we know that they
live at the junction
point between
consciousness and matter,
where Ayurveda said that
was the cause of disease.
That's where it takes
place, right at that point.
And if you could bring your
attention to that point,
you can shine the consciousness,
the light into the physiology
and restore the memory
of pure consciousness
and actually heal disease.
Well, this is what
the biophotons can do.
This explains distance
healing, prayer,
healing in the body at the
deepest fundamental level
with spontaneous remissions,
the placebo effect--
which is 82% effective,
35 to 82% effective.
No one understands
how it can work.
It works-- they think,
the mechanism, we think--
they think, have figured out
what the mechanism for this is,
which is understanding
that these biophotons are
charged with our own intention.
And they're
information-carrying particles
that carry information
with inside of us,
are establishing awareness
of field in physiology
or consciousness,
and that of restoring
the memory of pure conscious
within our own body.
But because these happen
at the speed of light
at great distances, they can
happen at great distances.
And if I was praying for
you or a family member,
that if I did it the right
way with the right type
of attention--
intention-- we could actually
elicit a healing response,
which is why many of
the studies on prayer
seem to work amazingly well.
Some of the studies don't.
And I would sure
to say that it has
something to do
with the intention
and how it was delivered.
Was there an attachment to
the return on the investment
of that intention?
Or was it just--
>>SUE: --completely
unconditional.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
I don't know that.
That's sort of like, the future.
But that's what I've
been writing about.
But it's just so amazing
to me that what quantum--
what she was describing was
what Vedi science talked
about thousands of years ago.
And we're beginning to see
that that can bear truth.
>>SUE: So if we're dialing
into a frequency that is
the frequency, that is
foundational to everything
in the material world--
everything in the
manifest world that--
and it happens at this
level of the mind field
where we're starting to
compress that information
and get it stuck in
certain patterns, which
lead to disease.
Or, opening it to possibility
and transformative patterns
that are available to
be different than they
were a minute ago.
And thereby, allowing
a flow and healing
and wholeness to restore.
>>DOUILLARD: And initiate,
I think, just an awareness--
awareness of, oh,
there's door number two.
I don't have to do the dumb
thing again, and again,
and again.
I'm seeing it in a way--
and we all done that.
We're all like, oh, wow.
I somehow, for
whatever reason, I'm
looking at this problem
in a different way.
And now I can solve the problem.
I think Einstein
said, when you're
trying to solve a problem
with a technology that
was existed with how the
problem started, is crazy.
But if we could actually
use a different technology,
we can solve the problem.
And that's exactly
what we're doing here,
is we're solving the problem
by enhancing awareness, which
gives us an opportunity
to look at door number
two versus the old door
number one-- which has
four lanes with lights on it.
We've been driving
it down, down,
down that road our entire life,
doing the same thing again
and again.
And now we've
started to realize,
wow, I really can change
old patterns of behavior
and give myself
permission to be loving,
to be joyful, to be kind, to be
content, as opposed to needing
all that attention, and
manipulating the world
to get that attention.
It's crazy.
>>SUE: Yes.
And so allowing us
to start to recognize
that we have a chance of
changing our environment,
changing our experiencing in it,
and it's going to feel better.
One of the ways that I
like to encourage people
to know that they're
dialing into this higher
frequency, this higher
level of consciousness,
is that it feels better.
It's just going to
feel better when
you're operating from the
place that you're describing.
And that's a way for people
to monitor how they're
doing, if they're progressing--
if they feel better
about the giving, if they feel
better about the thoughts,
if it feels better
in their physiology.
>>DOUILLARD: Like
you said earlier,
something about when
you're driving by,
you look at a plant.
You can look at it in
two different ways.
It's like with everything.
You know, I was watching a
video of a yogi giving himself
an Ayurvedic
massage, an abhyanga.
And I was so taken by--
he was giving
himself this massage.
He was giving a lecture while
he was massaging himself.
But he was loving his
leg with such affection,
I was like, couldn't
stop looking at that,
going like, I've
never given myself
a massage with that kind
of love and affection.
I'm just like rub, rub, rub,
get the oil on, you know?
>>SUE: Right.
Get the job done.
>>DOUILLARD: And I
was like, oh my god.
That's what this
whole thing is about.
It's the attention.
It's the intention when
you're doing your yoga,
the intention to
become more still--
not just get into the form.
When you're meditating, that
subtle intention-- when you're
caring for another
person or giving love,
it's that subtle intention
of giving yourself
permission to give it with
a little bit more sincerity,
a little bit more palpable
awareness of the process
of your actions in the giving.
>>SUE: Yeah, I think that that's
really valuable for our viewers
to understand.
Because sometimes, people have
a difficult time accessing
self-love.
And they get this pressure
that you have to love yourself.
And really, all we're
saying is that you're just
providing this information.
That just being
intentional and being kind,
and being nurturing to the
self, just your very presence
is all that's required
for this to unfold.
>>DOUILLARD: Right.
And feeling loved gives us
permission to love, right?
We feel safe to let
the petals open.
But you know, it
can really start.
We think we all need to be
loved and we need self-love.
The sun doesn't get
anything in return.
It just shines, right?
And fundamentally, that's what
we're really trying to get to,
a place where I feel safe
enough to give a little,
to love a little, to care
for another little bit more,
as opposed to realize
I'm so exhausted,
I just need, need, need, need.
It's true.
I get that.
And we need lifestyle
and diet and digestion,
and all that, to
get that better.
But soon as you have a
little glimmer of energy,
a little bit of love is
what will truly fill us
up and charge our battery.
It's not self-loving, as much as
it is being the love as opposed
to needing love.
So self-love is great.
And there's definitely
a time and a place
where you have to
care for yourself
to create the stillness to have
the self-awareness, clearly.
But the action step is what
the sun does, gives light.
And it doesn't care if the
moon makes nothing out of it.
I mean, it's like,
nothing grows there.
It would be embarrassing
for most suns to, like, ah,
we don't talk about the moon.
Because here, it's so beautiful.
There's no expectation.
There's no return on investment.
It's just the act of
being who we truly are.
And I was giving a seminar once.
And I said, we are
fundamentally love.
And someone said, do you
have any proof of that?
And I was like, gosh, no.
I don't.
So I went back and
I found the proof.
And I've written
articles about the proof.
We are fundamentally love.
We thrive in a loving,
kind environment.
We dissolve in
stressful situations.
We can handle stress
and we can be violent.
We can fight, but that's
not an enduring, sustainable
lifestyle.
We thrive, we evolve
when we give and care,
and love and appreciate others.
When we give and be the
sun, amazing things happen.
So we want to tap into that.
Because we are little mini
microcosms of the solar system.
That's who we are.
We're a little suns
that want to shine.
But our mind goes, no, no.
Even if you shine, what
if they don't shine back,
and they don't love you back?
You'll be screwed.
So therefore, you better
hold onto your love and wait
for them to love you.
And they never do.
And you just find your ways to
somehow manipulate approval.
And it just seems to
be so short-sighted.
>>SUE: Yes.
So much to share about so much.
And it's all right
here contained
in this conversation
of Ayurveda.
Where can people come to
learn more about what you do,
and what you have to offer?
>>DOUILLARD: Yeah,
I have a website
called lifespa.com,
where we prove
ancient medical wisdom of
Ayurveda with modern science.
And we have over a couple of
thousand articles and video
that are all for free on
my website, all about,
again, proving ancient
wisdom with modern science.
That's what it's all about.
And all that information
is up for free.
>>SUE: Oh, excellent.
Thank you, Dr. John.
I love you so much.
And it is so apparent
that you love what you do,
and that you are a loving
presence on the planet.
And anyone would be served
to be in touch with you.
So thank you again
for being here.
>>DOUILLARD: Well,
thank you, Sue.
So good to see you again.
>>SUE: Yes, wonderful.
Ayurveda teaches us that
the most subtle elements
can lead to the most
profound levels of healing.
The first step on
that journey is
for us to follow the cycles
of nature, to eat seasonally.
This first step is so
simple, but it opens the door
to deeper psychological healing.
To learn more about
Dr. John Douillard,
seasonal eating, and
Ayurvedic psychology,
please visit lifespa.com.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter,
and thank you
for watching "Healing Matrix".
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HEART BEATING]